Refactor torch.onnx documentation (#108379)
pytorch/pytorch: docs/source/onnx_dynamo.rst

TorchDynamo-based ONNX Exporter
===============================

.. contents:: :local:
    :depth: 3

.. warning::
  The ONNX exporter for TorchDynamo is under active development and is subject to rapid change.

Overview
--------

As mentioned before, the ONNX exporter leverages TorchDynamo engine to hook into Python's frame evaluation API
and dynamically rewrite its bytecode into an FX Graph.
The resulting FX Graph is then polished before it is finally translated into an ONNX graph.

The main advantage of this approach is that the `FX graph <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/fx.html>_` is captured using
bytecode analysis that preserves the dynamic nature of the model instead of using traditional static tracing techniques.

The exporter is designed to be modular and extensible. It is composed of the following components:

>   - **ONNX Registry**: A registry of ONNX operators and functions.

Reviewer: Add link to those classes?

Author: good idea.

  - **ONNX Exporter**: The main exporter that orchestrates the export process.
  - **ONNX Export Output**: The output of the exporter that contains the exported ONNX graph and diagnostics.
  - **ONNX Export Output Serializer**: A serializer that serializes the export output to a file.
  - **ONNX Diagnostic Options**: A set of options that control the diagnostics emitted by the exporter.
  - **ONNX Export Options**: A set of options that control the export process.

Dependencies
------------

The ONNX exporter depends on extra Python packages not available through PyTorchs's `requirements.txt` file:

  - `ONNX <https://onnx.ai>`_
  - `ONNX Script <https://onnxscript.ai>`_

They can be installed through `pip <https://pypi.org/project/pip/>`_ utility as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

  pip install onnx onnxscript-preview    # TODO: Replace with `onnxscript` when it is official

A simple example
----------------

See below a demonstration of exporter API in action with a simple image classifier model as example:

.. code-block:: python

  import torch

>   class MNISTModel(torch.nn.Module):

Reviewer: I am wondering if we should use MLP as the first example.

Author: What would change? The ultimate goal for the first example is show how to use the public API. The actual model architecture is kind of secondary given the promise of "work (in almost) every model"

Reviewer: Yep. The first example must be as simple as possible. This is ALWAYS a problem in Office and a lot of our ML softwares.

        self.conv2 = torch.nn.Conv2d(32, 64, 3, 1, bias=False)
        self.fc1 = torch.nn.Linear(9216, 128, bias=False)
        self.fc2 = torch.nn.Linear(128, 10, bias=False)

    def forward(self, tensor_x: torch.Tensor):
        tensor_x = self.conv1(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = self.conv2(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.max_pool2d(tensor_x, 2)
        tensor_x = torch.flatten(tensor_x, 1)
        tensor_x = self.fc1(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = self.fc2(tensor_x)
        output = torch.nn.functional.log_softmax(tensor_x, dim=1)
        return output

  tensor_x = torch.rand((64, 1, 28, 28), dtype=torch.float32)
  export_output = torch.onnx.dynamo_export(MNISTModel(), tensor_x)

As the code above shows, all you need is to provide ``torch.onnx.dynamo_export`` with an instance of the model and its input.
The exporter will then return an instance of ``torch.onnx.ExportOutput`` that contains the exported ONNX graph along with extra information.

> The in-memory model is available at ``export_output.model_proto`` following `ONNX IR spec <https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/IR.md>`_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The in-memory model (type: onnx.ModelProto) is available at ``export_output.model_proto`` following `ONNX IR spec <https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/IR.md>`_,
```

TorchDynamo-based ONNX Exporter
===============================

.. automodule:: torch.onnx
  :noindex:

.. contents:: :local:
    :depth: 3

.. warning::
  The ONNX exporter for TorchDynamo is under active development and is subject to rapid change.

Overview
--------

> As mentioned before, the ONNX exporter leverages TorchDynamo engine to hook into Python's frame evaluation API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ONNX exporter leverages TorchDynamo engine to hook into Python's frame evaluation API
```

nit: conciseness

and dynamically rewrite its bytecode into an FX Graph.
The resulting FX Graph is then polished before it is finally translated into an ONNX graph.

> The main advantage of this approach is that the `FX graph <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/fx.html>_` is captured using

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main advantage of this approach is that the `FX graph <https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/fx.html>`_ is captured using
```

bytecode analysis that preserves the dynamic nature of the model instead of using traditional static tracing techniques.

The exporter is designed to be modular and extensible. It is composed of the following components:

  - **ONNX Exporter**: :class:`Exporter` main class that orchestrates the export process.
  - **ONNX Export Options**: :class:`ExportOptions` has a set of options that control the export process.
  - **ONNX Registry**: :class:`OnnxRegistry` is the registry of ONNX operators and functions.
  - **FX Graph Extractor**: :class:`FXGraphExtractor` extracts the FX graph from the PyTorch model.

>   - **Fake Mode**: :class:`ONNXFakeContext` is a context manager that enables fake mode for large scale models.

Reviewer 2: Links for these two are not working: 
![image](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/assets/11205048/e4378fca-f0f4-4b3f-bda0-80080df24f1d)

Author: Yes, that happens because they are not part of `torch/onnx/__init__.py`, so the `automodule` directive does not capture.

I've tried to find a way to link to private classes in sphinx, but didn't find anything yet.

  - **ONNX Export Output**: :class:`ExportOutput` is the output of the exporter that contains the exported ONNX graph and diagnostics.
  - **ONNX Export Output Serializer**: :class:`ExportOutputSerializer` serializes the exported model to a file.
  - **ONNX Diagnostic Options**: :class:`DiagnosticOptions` has a set of options that control the diagnostics emitted by the exporter.

Dependencies
------------

> The ONNX exporter depends on extra Python packages not available through PyTorchs's `requirements.txt` file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ONNX exporter depends on these extra Python packages:
```

  - `ONNX <https://onnx.ai>`_
  - `ONNX Script <https://onnxscript.ai>`_

> They can be installed through `pip <https://pypi.org/project/pip/>`_ utility as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They can be installed through `pip <https://pypi.org/project/pip/>`_ :
```

.. code-block:: bash

>   pip install onnx onnxscript-preview    # TODO: Replace with `onnxscript` when it is official

Reviewer 2: I would make the todo an rst comment hidden from users

Author: done. the downside is that the comment will be "far" from the affected code because of the wrapping `.. code-block:: bash` block

>   pip install onnx onnxscript-preview    # TODO: Replace with `onnxscript` when it is official

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  pip install --upgrade onnx onnxscript-preview    # TODO: Replace with `onnxscript` when it is official
```

.. code-block:: python

  import torch

  class MNISTModel(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        super().__init__()
        self.conv1 = torch.nn.Conv2d(1, 32, 3, 1, bias=False)
        self.conv2 = torch.nn.Conv2d(32, 64, 3, 1, bias=False)
        self.fc1 = torch.nn.Linear(9216, 128, bias=False)
        self.fc2 = torch.nn.Linear(128, 10, bias=False)

    def forward(self, tensor_x: torch.Tensor):
        tensor_x = self.conv1(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = self.conv2(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.max_pool2d(tensor_x, 2)
        tensor_x = torch.flatten(tensor_x, 1)
        tensor_x = self.fc1(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = self.fc2(tensor_x)
        output = torch.nn.functional.log_softmax(tensor_x, dim=1)
        return output

  tensor_x = torch.rand((64, 1, 28, 28), dtype=torch.float32)
  export_output = torch.onnx.dynamo_export(MNISTModel(), tensor_x)

As the code above shows, all you need is to provide ``torch.onnx.dynamo_export`` with an instance of the model and its input.

> The exporter will then return an instance of ``torch.onnx.ExportOutput`` that contains the exported ONNX graph along with extra information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The exporter will then return an instance of :class:`torch.onnx.ExportOutput` that contains the exported ONNX graph along with extra information.
```

or whatever that will link to the doc for the class?

> The in-memory model (type: onnx.ModelProto) is available at ``export_output.model_proto`` following `ONNX IR spec <https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/IR.md>`_,

Reviewer 2: The mentioning of `ONNX IR spec` is a little unexpected. Potentially

```suggestion
The in-memory model available at ``export_output.model_proto`` is an ``onnx.ModelProto`` object in compliance with the `ONNX IR spec <https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/IR.md>`_.
```

or something better?

Author: LMK what you think of the new version

> but the ONNX model can also be serialized into a `Protobuf file <https://protobuf.dev/>`_ using the ``torch.onnx.ExportOutput.save`` API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ONNX model can also be serialized into a `Protobuf file <https://protobuf.dev/>`_ using the ``torch.onnx.ExportOutput.save`` API.
```

.. code-block:: python

  export_output.save("/path/to/mnist.onnx")

Inspecting the ONNX model using GUI
-----------------------------------

You can view the exported model using `Netron <https://netron.app/>`__.

.. image:: _static/img/onnx/onnx_dynamo_mnist_model.png
    :width: 50%

>     :alt: MNIST model as viewed in Netron

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/assets/11205048/4d677796-d092-4281-a6d0-347464777bee)

This model may be a little too large for illustration. Should we remove some layers?

Author: will use MLP instead

Note that each layer is represented in a rectangular box with a *f* icon in the top right corner.

.. image:: _static/img/onnx/onnx_dynamo_mnist_model_function_highlight.png
    :width: 50%
    :alt: ONNX function highlighted

By expanding it, the function body is shown.

.. image:: _static/img/onnx/onnx_dynamo_mnist_model_function_body.png
    :width: 50%
    :alt: ONNX function body

The function body is a sequence of ONNX operators or other functions.

Diagnosing issues with SARIF
----------------------------

ONNX diagnostics goes beyond regular logs through the adoption of
`Static Analysis Results Interchange Format (aka SARIF) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0/sarif-v2.1.0.html>`__
to help users debug and improve their model using a GUI, such as
Visual Studio Code's `SARIF Viewer <https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=MS-SarifVSCode.sarif-viewer>`_.

The main advantages are:

>   - The diagnostics are emitted in machine parsable .

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - The diagnostics are emitted in machine parseable `Static Analysis Results Interchange Format (SARIF) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0/sarif-v2.1.0.html>`__.
```
copied from old doc.

> TorchDynamo-based ONNX Exporter

Reviewer: Maybe add another section for exporting with dynamic shapes (not necessarily in this PR if you create an issue for tracking).

Reviewer: You don't need to avoid duplicate code in examples. You can just copy-and-paste the current example and set a flag. For people reading example, they will have hard time if they can't just copy-and-paste to run it.

Author: This first PR is the opening for a series of examples on how to do stuff. I am also doing the same for the PyTorch tutorials page at https://github.com/pytorch/tutorials/pull/2541

As soon as we find the best structure for this doc, we can add sections for more advanced features, such as dynamic_shapes, fake mode, diagnostics, custom ops, etc

        tensor_x = self.conv2(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.max_pool2d(tensor_x, 2)
        tensor_x = torch.flatten(tensor_x, 1)
        tensor_x = self.fc1(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = torch.nn.functional.sigmoid(tensor_x)
        tensor_x = self.fc2(tensor_x)
        output = torch.nn.functional.log_softmax(tensor_x, dim=1)
        return output

  tensor_x = torch.rand((64, 1, 28, 28), dtype=torch.float32)
  export_output = torch.onnx.dynamo_export(MNISTModel(), tensor_x)

As the code above shows, all you need is to provide :func:`torch.onnx.dynamo_export` with an instance of the model and its input.
The exporter will then return an instance of :class:`torch.onnx.ExportOutput` that contains the exported ONNX graph along with extra information.

The in-memory model available through ``export_output.model_proto`` is an ``onnx.ModelProto`` object in compliance with the `ONNX IR spec <https://github.com/onnx/onnx/blob/main/docs/IR.md>`_.
The ONNX model be serialized into a `Protobuf file <https://protobuf.dev/>`_ using the :meth:`torch.onnx.ExportOutput.save` API.

.. code-block:: python

>   export_output.save("/path/to/mnist.onnx")

Reviewer: Maybe move this to the code block above, so that the user can copy-and-paste to execute the whole process. You can add comments to make it clearer. E.g.,
```
export_output = torch.onnx.dynamo_export(MNISTModel(), tensor_x)
# Now exporting is done. You can further save the result into .onnx file.
export_output.save("/path/to/mnist.onnx")

> 

Reviewer: We can add another code block to show how to run the exported in-memory model with ORT. That's exactly the next step an ideal user wants to know. It also helps the rest of us to prototype new features with a small but end-to-end example.

Inspecting the ONNX model using GUI
-----------------------------------

You can view the exported model using `Netron <https://netron.app/>`__.

.. image:: _static/img/onnx/onnx_dynamo_mnist_model.png
    :width: 50%
    :alt: MNIST model as viewed in Netron

Note that each layer is represented in a rectangular box with a *f* icon in the top right corner.

.. image:: _static/img/onnx/onnx_dynamo_mnist_model_function_highlight.png
    :width: 50%
    :alt: ONNX function highlighted

By expanding it, the function body is shown.

.. image:: _static/img/onnx/onnx_dynamo_mnist_model_function_body.png
    :width: 50%
    :alt: ONNX function body

The function body is a sequence of ONNX operators or other functions.

Diagnosing issues with SARIF
----------------------------

ONNX diagnostics goes beyond regular logs through the adoption of
`Static Analysis Results Interchange Format (aka SARIF) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/sarif/sarif/v2.1.0/sarif-v2.1.0.html>`__
to help users debug and improve their model using a GUI, such as

> Visual Studio Code's `SARIF Viewer <https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=MS-SarifVSCode.sarif-viewer>`_.

Reviewer: Explain how to open SARIF file after this viewer is installed; e.g.,
- find SARIF file from file exporter window (usually on the right side of VSCode window)
- right click
- ...

SAIRF is a new thing for exporter and even PyTorch. We need to assume users have zero experience with it when writing docs.
